(lively music)
(keyboard clacking)
We've just covered a bunch of sort algorithms
and we've implemented those algorithms in Java,
so suppose you have an array
that you wanna sort in a Java application.
Do you implement one of those algorithms
to sort the array?
Well, you can, especially if you can use one
of the linear sort algorithms
that makes assumptions about the data
but if you can't do that,
if you can't make any assumptions about the data,
if counting sort and radix sort aren't suitable,
do you go ahead and implement one of the algorithms?
Well, you don't have to because hey, it's Java.
We have the JDK at our disposal
and the JDK contains an arrays class
and that class has methods that sort arrays.
So, let's take a look at the arrays Java doc.
I've got it on the screen.
So, right at the top,
it says this class contains various methods
for manipulating arrays such as sorting.
So, let's scroll down and take a look at the sort methods.
As you can see, there are a lot of methods here
and boom, look at all these methods as well.
So, these are all methods for primitive types
but you'll se that you can also sort objects.
If you wanna sort objects, of course you have to tell
the runtime how to sort those objects
and so, you'd implement the comparable interface.
That's what the natural ordering would be,
it would be based on the comparable.
You'll also notice that there are sort methods
that sort the entire array
or just a part of the array,
so you don't have to implement these sort methods
when you wanna sort an array in Java.
As I said, we've got a whole library at our disposal
and the arrays class has sort methods,
so let's go back to the IDE now
and call the appropriate sort method
on our usual example array.
I've created a project, I've put the code
into academy.learnprogramming.sortingarrays
and I've created our usual array.
We've gone back to our seven-element array
that we were working with before we looked
at counting sort and radix sort
and I have the usual code for printing the array.
So, we wanna sort this array,
so let's just call Arrays.sort
and we'll just pass it our intArray.
And let's run.
And there we go, minus 22, minus 15,
one, seven, 20, 35 and 55.
So, that's wonderful
but now that we know about all these sort algorithms,
we might ask well, what sort algorithm is it using?
So, let's go to the source code for this.
So, I'm going to right click
and say Go To the Declaration
and here we are and we'll see that it's using something
called a DualPivotQuicksort
and we can see from the comments
that this is a modified form of Quicksort
that doesn't degrade as much for larger datasets
and it's typically faster than the Quicksort
that uses one pivot,
so this algorithm offers O n to the log n performance
on many datasets that cause other quicksorts
to degrade to quadratic performance.
Remember that I mentioned
that in the worst case, Quicksort is a quadratic algorithm
but in the average case it's O n log n.
It also says that a Dual-Pivot is typically faster
than traditional one-pivot Quicksort algorithms,
so if you were interested in looking
at how this DualPivotQuicksort algorithm works,
you could probably find an article out there
on the web somewhere that will explain what it's doing
but we can guess that it's using two pivots
rather than one.
The arrays class also has a bunch of parallel sort methods,
so let's go back to our main class here
and let's call parallelSort
instead of just plain old sort.
ParallelSort.
It's giving me this error
because even though I'm using Java 9,
for some reason the language level it sets
is sometimes lower than that,
so this has only been available since Java 8
and so, if you see that,
a light bulb should come up,
where'd that light bulb go?
And then you can just say set my language level
to Java 8, please and there we go.
So, that's how we fix that error.
So, let's run.
And once again, we have our sorted values,
minus 22 up to 55
but what's this doing?
Well, let's go to the source code,
so we'll right click, Go To the Declaration
and close this down for a minute
and if we scroll up,
we'll see it's a hybrid algorithm of sorts.
It's a parallel sort merge
that breaks the array into sub arrays
that are assorted and then merged
but when the sub array length reaches a minimum granularity,
the sub array is sorted using
the appropriate arrays.sort method
which is know is Quicksort.
So, it's doing a merge sort
but when it's dealing with smaller partitions,
it's sorting them using Quicksort
rather than just traversing the arrays
and copying the smaller element
into a temporary array.
It's also using threads
and that's why it's called parallelSort.
So, this sort might be faster for larger datasets.
So, if you have a larger dataset,
using parallelSort might result
in a faster sort.
You'd have to run some benchmarks to decide
whether to just call sort or parallelSort.
And that's all I wanted to do in this video.
The point is that it's good to understand
the different types of sort algorithms
but you don't necessarily have to implement them yourself
and you'll see the same thing
when we look at some of the upcoming data structures.
Java has a lot of support for commonly used data structures.
So, you rarely have to implement
the data structure yourself.
There is often a class in the JDK
that has already done it for you or if there isn't,
you can usually find a third-party library
that has an implementation that you can use.
So, the bottom line here
is that you don't have to write the sort code
when you wanna sort an array.
You have methods available to you in the JDK
and so, unless you wanna use counting or radix sort,
or unless for some reason
you don't wanna use a DualPivotQuicksort
or you don't wanna use a merge sort-Quicksort hybrid,
you'll typically just go ahead
and use one of the sort methods in the JDK
and if you want to sort an array of objects,
remember that you'll have to implement
the comparable interface
so that the method knows
how it's supposed to order your objects
when it's doing a sort.
I'll see you in the next video.